---
layout: post
title: good enough tech and smartphones
date: '2009-10-06T17:54:20-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://turqee.tumblr.com/post/206190143/good-enough-tech-and-smartphones
published: true
---
I was reading Wired’s article, [The Good Enough Revolution: When Cheap
and Simple Is Just
Fine](http://www.wired.com/gadgets/miscellaneous/magazine/17-09/ff_goodenough),
specifically regarding the popular [Flip video
recorder](http://www.theflip.com/), and I couldn’t help but think,
“we’re going to eat those guys for lunch”.

When I say "we", I mean system-on-chip vendors like Texas Instruments,
Qualcomm, Freescale, Samsung, etc. Likewise when I say "those guys" I
refer to any device maker whose product overlaps with the smartphone
roadmap.

What does the smartphone roadmap look like? Increased multimedia
applications, more and more wireless standards supported and tons of new
and exciting sensors that no one has ever considered before.

Some day you might plug your phone into your TV to play HD content. Or
you might use your phone to open your garage door remotely, instead of
using that silly little device that you leave inside your car clipped to
your visor. And dedicated sensing devices like heart rate monitors,
sport watches, bike computers and pedometers? No good reason a phone
couldn't replace those either. Home automation solutions have always
suffered from terrible user interfaces. I think that the beautiful
device you carry around with you in your pocket solves this problem.

Its 2009 and we’ve already got [chips available for
purchase](http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/omap3530.html)
that can record and playback 720p video. In a phone. That you already
carry with you.

This is the often-talked about Convergence Device(tm). So my question
is, what other devices will be gobbled up by the ever-expanding
capabilities of smart phones?

I see a future where the peripheral device, or last-mile device still
exists. It will communicate with your phone wirelessly, allowing your
smartphone to do all of the heavy data processing and presentation on
your beautiful touch screen. But a dedicated device that tries to do the
whole thing? Forget about. The convergence device is going to eat your
lunch.
