---
layout: post
title: Review of Aoyue 2900 soldering station
date: '2010-04-25T23:29:00-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: http://turqee.tumblr.com/post/549931214/review-of-aoyue-2900-soldering-station
published: true
---
Diane gave me an [Aoyue
2900](http://www.aoyue.com/en/ArticleShow.asp?ArticleID=327) soldering
station for Christmas in 2009.  I’ve had a few opportunities to use it
for various tasks ranging from fixing a servo with a loose connection in
our cat’s favorite toy to desoldering voltage measurement leads from
capacitors on a system-on-module.  This is my first soldering station
for private use and I’ll cut through the thick-as-lead suspense and say
that it performs great.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/turqy/4553668750" title="workbench by turqy, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3435/4553668750_d307fe8447_z.jpg" width="640" height="480" alt="workbench"></a>

The Aoyue 2900 comes with the soldering station (digital readout and
temperature control, with reset), a no frills iron and a simple stand
for your iron, spare tips & sponge.  The kit predictably comes with one
pointed soldering tip (no flat tips or blade tips), and a simple guide
for setup and operation.  The guide is so short and sweet that I can’t
think of a reason not to glance through it.

Enough about what’s in the box, how does it perform?  The tip heats up
from room temperature to the default 350°F in around 10 seconds.  The
provided handle provides enough heat protection for me, and I’m a wuss
regarding hot things.  The rubber choke at the neck could be a bit
bigger for a better grip, but this is a minor quibble.  The provided tip
worked as-expected after a proper tinning.  Basically, it solders stuff.

So what could possibly be wrong with this product?  For starters the
stand is a joke.  The choke on the neck of the handle is a bit small as
mentioned above but the problem is greatly exacerbated by the horribly
designed O-ring on the stand that is supposed to act as the rest for
your iron.  Good luck getting the tip to float freely in there and not
contact any other metal.  I learned this the first time using the
station: I casually put the iron in the stand as any normal person might
and quickly noticed a bit of smokiness coming from where the tip was
boiling off the black finish of the stand.  From this point on putting
the iron into the stand is a two handed job as well as a big
disappointment.  If you have an old ‘n’ trusty stand you’ve been using
for years don’t throw it out; you’ll want to use it with this station.

On a lesser note the spool axle attached the stand (a nice touch in
theory) rests very primitively in a trough; any force applied to it,
such as quickly unspooling solder during tinning, causes the spool to
hop off of the stand.  The spool axle could also have more clearance
from the base of the stand as larger spools of solder won’t fit.  Least
importantly, but still annoying, is that the sponge that comes with it
is super wimpy.  Even after a decent bath of pure Texas tap water, the
sponge was ~half a millimeter thick and tended to scoot all around the
base instead of holding it’s ground while cleaning the tip of the iron.
Realistically sponges are completely disposable so after this one has
given up the ghost it will be quickly replaced with a much nicer one.

So what is the verdict?  The important parts of the station work great.
Temperature control is simple and responds quickly with an affirmative
“beep”.  The iron is simple but of adequate quality and the supplied tip
is what 90% of hobbyists need to get the job done.  The stand sucks but
if you have your own that you like already then nothing about the
station’s setup forces you to adopt to one provided.  Even the terribly
designed solder spool dispenser is easily overlooked since many
hobbyists simply handle the solder spool by hand.  I rate this as a
“buy” and am very pleased with the purchase Christmas gift.  I can’t
really compare to other low-cost soldering stations since the kinds I’ve
used at university and at work are much more expensive, but I don’t see
much room for improvement in the core design of this station given the
rock-bottom price.
